ThreadNum: 566185
Subject: Re: MathCounts Triangle, Dividends, and Paper
To: sumajayakar@juno.com (Sujay)
From: Doctor Roy
TimeStamp: 08/09/2004 at 17:54:53
Sent: yes

Hi,

Thanks for writing to Dr. Math.

Let's take these problems one at a time:

>1) The endpoints of segment AB are A(0,8) and B(15,0).  What is the
>shortest distance, in units, from P(0,0) to segment AB? Express your
>answer as a common fraction.

One of the first things to realize is that the shortest distance
between a point and a line is the one that is perpendicular to the
line. So, the dotted line in your diagram forms right angles with the
line segment AB. Let's label the intersection point C.

There are a couple ways to approach this problem knowing that the
intersection forms right angles.

1) Geometrically: We know that the triangle ABP is a right triangle.
Therefore, knowing that the angle ACP is a right angle, we can use the
 fact that the triangle ACP is similar to triangle APB. So, we can
form the ratios:

     x/15 = 8/17

x is the length of line segment CP (the longer leg of triangle ACP).
15 is the length of the longer leg of triangle APB. 8 is the length of
the hypotenuse of triangle ACP. 17 is the length of the hypotenuse of
triangle APB (use the Pythagorean theorem to calculate 17 is the
hypotenuse of a right triangle with legs of length 8 and 15). Solving
for x gives you 120/17.

2) Algebraically: We know the shortest distance is perpendicular.
Again use C as the intersection point. The line passing through A and
B is given by the equation:

     y = 8 - 8x/15

We know that the product of the slopes of perpendicular lines is -1.
So the slope of the line passing through (0,0) and C must be 15/8. So,
the equation of that line is:

     y = 15x/8

from the point-slope formula.

Solving these two equations gives us the coordinates of C, which can
be used to get the distance from C to P, which is again 120/17. This
does involve quite a bit more work, so you are probably better off
using the geometric approach.

>
>2) When a positive three digit dividend with a units digit of 2 is
>divided by a positive one digit divisor, the result is a whole number
>quotient with a remainder of 1.  How many distinct values are possible
>for this three digit dividend?
>
>2) I didn't know how to start.  I am not sure if the one digit divisor
>can change or it stays constant.  I think it stays constant.
>

The problem states _possible_ distinct values. So, any possible
positive one digit divisor is possible, as long as there is a
remainder of 1 and the three digit dividend ends in 2. 

Since the three digit dividend ends in 2 and there is a remainder of
1, we know that the divisor is odd, since an even number divisor will
always leave an even remainder. That means that divisor can be 1, 3,
5, 7, or 9. Since every number is divisible by 1, we can eliminate 1.
Since 9 is a multiple of 3, we can eliminate 9 as well. And all
numbers which leave a remainder of 1 when divided by 5 end in either 1
or 6. So, we can eliminate 5 as well.

There are 100 three digit numbers which end in 2. So, we only have to
consider all the possibilities if they are divided by 3 or 7. 

Let's start with 3. Notice that 22 leaves a remainder of 1 when
divided by 3. Because that is true, 22+30 = 52 also leaves a remainder
of 1 when divided by 3. Also 52+30 = 82 leaves a remainder of 1 when
divided by 3. And so on. So, 112, 142, 172, 202, etc. all leave a
remainder of 1 when divided by 3. There are 30 such three digit
numbers which end in 2.

Now, let's move onto 7. 22 leaves a remainder of 1 when divided by 7.
So, 22+70 = 92 also leaves a remainder of 1 when divided by 7. As does
92+70 = 162. So, 162, 232, 302, 372, etc. all leave a remainder of 1
when divided by 7. There are 12 such three digit numbers. However,
every 3rd such number has already been counted. For example, 232 was
counted with the 3's. So, 4 of these numbers have already been
counted, leaving 8 possible numbers.

30 + 8 = 38. So, there are 38 possible three digit numbers which match
this criterion.

>3) Quadrilateral ABCD is a one inch by three inch piece of paper. 
>Corner D is folded to coincide with corner B to form the fold EF.  In
>inches, what is the length fo AE? Express your answer as a mixed
>number (Illustration can be found on
>www.geocities.com\sujayakar11\paper.bmp).
>
>3) I assumed that DF equals 1.5 and CD equals 1.  But after using the
>Pythagorean theorem to find CF, I became stuck.
>

NEVER assume anything in a math problem unless you are told you can do
so. It's not a good practice.

Notice that the distance BE is equal to the distance ED (why?). Let's
say that the distance AE = x. Then, the distance BE = 3-x, since the
distance AE + distance BE = 3. Notice that AED forms a right triangle,
and the distance AD = 1. Using the Pythagorean theorem, we get:

     x^2 + 1^2 = (3 - x)^2

Solving for x gives you the distance from A to E.

- Doctor Roy, The Math Forum
  <http://mathforum.org/dr.math/>

